I am a computer programmer and developer by trade, and I am
accustomed with development on Linux (and UNIX in general) and on
Windows. I prefer Linux and I'd like to tell you why.

I will not lie to you by telling you that all the tools you can find
on Linux are completely unavailable on Windows. In fact, it would be
possible to get a working Linux-like development environment on top
of Windows. However, this solution is both not as integrated as a
native Linux workstation and will require a lot of time and
frustration to set up. This fact is partly due to the fact that free
software traditionally originated from the UNIX world, and partly due
to the fact that Microsoft does not make enough effort to change the
situation. (Whether it desires that is a different matter, but I
won't go into it)

After downloading and installing a Linux distribution, I already have
most the tools that I need and use on my hard disk. What I don't
have, I can download from the Internet for free. Linux has the
property that almost everything compiles and installs with as little
hassle as possible, due to the fact that it's the most popular UNIX
variant and the one where most of the development of open-source
software takes place.

Not only that, but I find the tools that are available on Linux,
better (at least when taken as a whole) than their equivalent
commercial counterparts. I developed a very delicate and complex C
program that can run on both Linux and Windows, and I found the gdb
debugger much more helpful in tracking obscure bugs, than Microsoft
Visual Studio with all of its bells and whistles.

I also recently co-developed a simulator for Internet noise using
Linux as its architecture. With the power that was given to us by the
new Netfilter architecture, we were able to keep a lot of the
development in Perl, which is a very common high-level language used
on Linux. Later, we converted everything to C to gain speed, but we
had the advantage of having a working Perl code, to base upon.

Aside from all that, I also developed countless web-based services on
Linux. While using the Apache web-server in combination with Perl, I
managed to develop them quickly and easily, and without paying or
owing anybody a dime. It was sometimes done at the comfort of my own
home. For the record, a comparable NT/2000 with the same pipeline
would cost dozens of thousands of dollars (excluding the hardware).

With the advent of GUI environments such as KDE and GNOME, I found
out that working on Linux, even for not developing stuff, has become
much more comfortable than Windows. While I use the graphical
user-interface a lot, I can always default on the command-line and
Perl to perform and automate the tasks I have to do as a user. And in
Linux, almost everything can be done on the command-line, and thus,
it is, all, programmable.
